Ladies and gentlemen, and for many of you, dear comrades
this day began very sadly.
The feeling that oppressed us when we heard the news of the death of Fidel
made us think once more that it is in the example of our heroes
that we relentlessly draw the lessons and the energy we need in order to keep paving the way
that they had began to clear in their time and place.
I imagine what a surprise it must be for a lot of people to learn we're gathering tonight
to honour the memory of Fidel Castro.
No sooner had he drawn his final breath
that it already looked like it had only been drawn to feed the embers
of quarrels and caricatures about him.
Therefore, beyond the gate of time, if we want to be understood,
and if we want that the role this man played for us all be understood,
we need to remember that when the magnificent fire burst, lit by the attacks of our comrades
who took down Fulgencio Batista's regime
- a fire that illuminates the island [of Cuba] and gave it its destiny -
the world was then divided between the socialist revolutions that every year shook
the humiliated people, the poor and the oppressed against their tyrants,
and those who at all costs and by every imaginable mean, wanted to maintain the old world order.
It was an age when USSR still existed.
It was in this era, just a few years after, that the revolution succeeded
in China and in many other countries.
On the other side, there were the USA and their racial discrimination,
a great power that subjugated all the countries and peoples of Latin America.
Such was the meaning of the Cuban revolution.
Such was the message of enthusiasm and mobilization it brought to the peoples.
Then time passed.
How many events that changed the planet occured so many times during the life of Fidel?
And for all these years, there was this never-ending embargo,
which first concerned 20% of the Cuban economy, since the Russians took care of the 80% left.
Then after the fall of the Berlin Wall, Cuba was almost completely isolated.
It had almost nothing left but the strength of its people
and a mobilization that was not induced by any coercion,
but by the will of millions of people who mobilized to make Cuba an independent country.
Cuba, the Cuban people and Fidel defeated resignation.
How could we forget...
How could we forget that during every fight we led,
whether in victory or defeat - so many defeats! -
it was to Cuba that the tortured, the imprisoned, the defeated came to regain their strength,
to receive medical care after Cuba already helped them in all possible ways.
This is the way we remember Fidel and Cuba!
This little island in the Caribbean
that so many "high-minded people" judge by comparing it to Switzerland or to France,
demanding the regime to reach objectives we're not even capable of attaining anymore
with the poor, the deprived and the  homeless.
Cuba, so small.
Cuba, so surrounded.
Cuba, always here first when Fidel called.
Everytime there's an earthquake, a hurricane, a tornado
Who are the first to help ? The Cuban doctors! Always!
Cuba, still loyal when the democratic wave reached Latin America, feeding the Bolivarian revolution,
the citizens' revolution of Ecuador, Lula, Mujica, Kirchner, so many people.
Where does the fire come from if not from Cuba's heart and spirit ?
When the time came, who were the first to help us ?
Who did miracles if not the Cubans ?
Who gave their life and their sight back to more than 100,000 people in Venezuela,
people nobody cared about before Chavez asked the help of the Cubans to cure the deprived.
Who can forget the huge lines of Indians who crossed the Altiplano
to enter Bolivia, where Cuban doctors came in order to cure people of cataract?
People that everybody had given up on before Evo Morales asked to help them.
This is what Cuba is.
And I wish that those who will be told lies about Fidel again and again
remember all this and understand why we are gathering here tonight,
why we bring flowers, why we sing songs, why our hearts are broken.
Making mistakes when running a country, anybody could do that.
But surviving, keeping the fight going, remaining worthy of the mission you were entrusted with,
despite 600 murder attempts against Fidel, well this cannot be done by anyone.
And such is Fidel's unique greatness.
When we ask Cubans about prison,
they first tell us about Guantanamo, USA's official torture centre,
which is still open eight years after Obama was elected.
Of course, it doesn't seem to be a problem for many people that their leaders kill people here and there,
or that they accept being spied by the USA.
But Fidel saw the world differently. His world was one of resistance.
And we need to tell all the people talking about this in Latin America, whether we are right or left-wingers,
everyone admires Fidel and independent Cuba, because everyone knows that
Cuba helped all the fights for independance, no matter the political tendency of their governments.
Fidel! Fidel!
¿Qué tiene Fidel, que los gringos no pueden con él? (What does Fidel have, that the US can't defeat him?)
Fidel! Fidel! What happened?
Did Fidel make mistakes? Sure, Fidel made mistakes.
Everybody makes mistakes but everybody is not Fidel!
Fidel!
Here is the crowd of the oppressed and the humiliated from two continents that accompanies you in your final walk.
They are extraordinary intellectuals, workers and peasants who were persecuted by brutal regimes in Latin America.
They are from Africa, to which Cuba was also devoted.
Fidel, here is the crowd that walks in the night.
Here is Patrice Lumumba.
Here is Thomas Sankara.
Here is Salvador Allende.
Here are the peasants, the Indians, the workers, the workers from every country.
They look towards the horizon where you no longer are, for you walk with terrible shadows.
Fidel, tomorrow was a promise as long as you were there
Fidel walks through the clouds (rhymes in French: Fidel marche au ciel).
And here is Bolivar's sword
that walks in front of him.
Beware! Beware! Here is Bolivar's sword that walks throughout Latin America.
Beware! Beware! Here is freedom that Fidel served that walks in front of you,
And here are our steps. They may be heavy, worried and sad,
but they are the steps of those who walk toward the freedom of Humanity,
who sometimes admit their mistakes in order to stand up and keep going further relentlessly without ever giving in!
¡Gloria Fidel!